# Benthic foraminifera Carbon Gradient in the South East Pacific

## Repository's Overview

This repository contains data and the scripts related to the article "Carbon stable isotopes of deep infaunal and epifaunal benthic foraminifera in the Southeast Pacific: lessons from shallow-water samples for a paleoxygenation proxy" (in preparation)

## Research's Abstract

The difference between the carbon isotopic composition between the calcareous test δ13C of Cibicidoides wuellerstorfi (δ<sup>13</sup>C<sub>Cw</sub>) and Globobulimina species (δ<sup>13</sup>C<sub>Gb</sub>) is directly related to the dissolved oxygen concentration in the bottom water (BWDO). This difference is known as the carbon gradient proxy, which can reconstruct bottom water oxygenation over the geological record. Calibrations for the proxy have been performed globally, including the Atlantic, North, and Equatorial Pacific oceans and the Arabian and Mediterranean seas, but lacking in the Southeast Pacific (SEP). Significant oxygen gradients characterize the SEP, which hosts one of the most important oxygen depleted zones in the world: the SEP-ODZ. We calibrated the carbon gradient proxy in the SEP using carbon isotope analyses of C. wuellerstorfi and Globobulimina species from 79 surface sediment samples covering from 4°N to 50°S and 124 to 3,960 m water depth. We complemented the Δδ<sup>13</sup>C<sub>Cw-Gb</sub> with the difference between the bottom water dissolved inorganic carbon δ<sup>13</sup>C<sub>DIC</sub> and Globobulimina δ<sup>13</sup>CGb (Δδ<sup>13</sup>C<sub>DIC-Gb</sub>). Then, we compared the Δδ<sup>13</sup>C<sub>Cw-Gb</sub> and Δδ<sup>13</sup>C<sub>DIC-Gb</sub> to BWDO at different water depths, assessing the effects of environmental factors like bottom water nitrate concentration (BWNO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>), carbonate ion concentration (BWCO<sub>3</sub>2<sup>-</sup>), pH, and ocean net primary productivity. Cibicidoides wuellerstorfi δ13CCw is affected by BWCO<sub>3</sub><sup>2-<sup> and pH above 1,000 m, and primarily above 500 m. For Globobulimina species, BWNO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup> seems to impact their δ<sup>13</sup>C<sub>Gb</sub> above 500 m, while below 500 m, BWDO is the main driver. Consequently, we identified two proxies: one for depths below 1,000 m (R<sup>2</sup> = 0.74), and another for depths 500–1,000 m (R<sup>2</sup> = 0.67). Higher reliability was found at 500–1,000 m if only G. affinis is used (R<sup>2</sup> = 0.72). The calibrated proxies extend the applicability of benthic foraminiferal δ<sup>13</sup>C to the SEP, providing a region-specific tool with worldwide potential for reconstructing past oceanic oxygenation, with an error of around ±14 µmol kg<sup>-1</sup> for the reconstructed BWDO values.

